README.md, before:

Faxanadu for NES Disassembly
============================

[Faxanadu](https://www.mobygames.com/game/7331/faxanadu/) is a criminally
under-appreciated game for the NES, combining action, platforming, and some
puzzle-solving with an atmosphere you don't often see on the NES.

I've been working on a full disassembly of the game (sometimes
[streaming it on Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/chipx86)) with the following
goals:

* Accuracy of information
* Documentation of all major parts of the codebase
* Identification of everything in RAM.
* Enough information to help people mod this wonderful game.

Through this work, I've made some fun discoveries. My favorites:

* [A full scripting language](https://notes.chipx86.com/Projects/Reverse-Engineering+Projects/Faxanadu+Disassembly/Interaction+Scripts),
  used for all NPC and item interactions
* [Debug level select code](https://notes.chipx86.com/Projects/Reverse-Engineering+Projects/Faxanadu+Disassembly/Debug+Level+Switch+Code#Activating+this+code),
  which can be activated using two Game Genie codes


# What's in this tree

* [src](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/src) -
  Annotated assembly files for Faxanadu, compatible with
  [asm6f](https://github.com/freem/asm6f).
* [html](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/html) -
  HTML version of the annotated HTML assembly files
* [ghidra](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/ghidra) -
  Ghidra files where my disassembly work is being done
* [mesen](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/mesen) -
  Labels/symbols files for the [Mesen](https://www.mesen.ca/) emulator's
  debugger


# Documentation

There's both annotated assembly and higher-level docs on Faxanadu available.

* [Annotated HTML Assembly](https://chipx86.com/faxanadu/)

  (Please note this is generated with a custom exporter for
  [Ghidra](https://github.com/NationalSecurityAgency/ghidra), which is still
  very much a work-in-progress.)

* [Faxanadu Internals Notes](https://notes.chipx86.com/Projects/Reverse-Engineering+Projects/Faxanadu+Disassembly/!+Overview)

  My collection of notes and full-on documentation of parts of the Faxanadu
  codebase, incuding password system and interaction scripting language.


# Compiling Faxanadu

The [source files](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/src) can be
compiled using [asm6f](https://github.com/freem/asm6f), producing a
byte-for-byte copy of the Faxanadu code.

This has been tested on macOS and Linux.

Please note that this is purely for experimental and research purposes. Please
don't use this as a way of pirating the game. Surely this is an inconvenient
way to go about it.


# Using the Mesen Labels File

The Mesen Labels File will make any symbols/labels from my diassembly work
available in the Mesen debugger.

To use it:

1. Download [mesen/faxanadu.mlb](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/blob/main/mesen/faxanadu.mlb).

2. In Mesen, open your completely legally-obtained Faxanadu ROM.

3. Open **Debug -> Debugger**, and then **File -> Workspace -> Import Labels**.

4. Select the `faxanadu.mlb` file.


# Other resources

* [Faxanatools](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanatools), a set of Python tools
  I'm building to help inspect and mod Faxanadu.

* [Faxanadu Randomizer](https://www.romhacking.net/utilities/1470/), a different
  Faxanadu adventure every time you play.


# Special thanks

* Hungry Goriya ([YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/hungrygoriya),
  [Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/hungrygoriya)),
  a fantastic retro streamer and Faxanadu fan with an amazing community.

* Refraction ([BlueSky](https://bsky.app/profile/refractionpcsx2.bsky.social)),
  a fellow dev who's 🤔'd and 🧐'd with me on stream while I've debugged
  some of this.

* Songbirder ([BlueSky](https://bsky.app/profile/songbirder.social),
  [Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/songbirder)) from the Faxanadu Randomizer
  project, who's been very kind and encouraging with this work.


# What else do I do?

I'm the founder and CEO of [Beanbag](https://beanbaginc.com), creators of
[Review Board](https://www.reviewboard.org/), one of the first code review
products on the market (before GitHub even existed!).

Previously, I worked at VMware on the Workstation, Player, Server, WSX, and
View products. I worked in the Linux desktop on parts of GNOME and GTK+, and
was a core developer of the Gaim/Pidgin IM client.

You can find me elsewhere on the Internet at:

* [Website](https://chipx86.com)
* [Blog](https://chipx86.blog)
* [Bluesky](https://bsky.app/profile/chipx86.com)
* [Twitter/X](https://x.com/chipx86)
* [Mastodon](https://mastodon.online/@chipx86)
* [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/chipx86/)
* [GitHub](https://github.com/chipx86/)
* [Buy Me A Coffee](https://buymeacoffee.com/chipx86)

Commit message:

Fix a link in the README and reorder links.
The Overview page for the Faxanadu Disassembly Notes has been renaemd.
This updates the link and moves the Notes and Annotated Disassembly
higher up the README.

README.md, after:

Faxanadu for NES Disassembly
============================

[Faxanadu](https://www.mobygames.com/game/7331/faxanadu/) is a criminally
under-appreciated game for the NES, combining action, platforming, and some
puzzle-solving with an atmosphere you don't often see on the NES.

I've been working on a full disassembly of the game (sometimes
[streaming it on Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/chipx86)) with the following
goals:

* Accuracy of information
* Documentation of all major parts of the codebase
* Identification of everything in RAM.
* Enough information to help people mod this wonderful game.

Through this work, I've made some fun discoveries. My favorites:

* [A full scripting language](https://notes.chipx86.com/Projects/Reverse-Engineering+Projects/Faxanadu+Disassembly/Interaction+Scripts),
  used for all NPC and item interactions
* [Debug level select code](https://notes.chipx86.com/Projects/Reverse-Engineering+Projects/Faxanadu+Disassembly/Debug+Level+Switch+Code#Activating+this+code),
  which can be activated using two Game Genie codes

To learn more about all the cool stuff in Faxanadu, see:

* [Faxanadu Disassembly Notes](https://notes.chipx86.com/Projects/Reverse-Engineering+Projects/Faxanadu+Disassembly/-Overview-)

  My collection of notes and full-on documentation of parts of the Faxanadu
  codebase, incuding password system and interaction scripting language.

* [Annotated HTML Assembly](https://chipx86.com/faxanadu/)

  The in-progress annotated HTML, with hyperlinks and embedded sprites and
  all.

  (Please note this is generated with a custom exporter for
  [Ghidra](https://github.com/NationalSecurityAgency/ghidra), which is still
  very much a work-in-progress.)


# What's in this tree

* [src](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/src) -
  Annotated assembly files for Faxanadu, compatible with
  [asm6f](https://github.com/freem/asm6f).
* [html](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/html) -
  HTML version of the annotated HTML assembly files
* [ghidra](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/ghidra) -
  Ghidra files where my disassembly work is being done
* [mesen](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/mesen) -
  Labels/symbols files for the [Mesen](https://www.mesen.ca/) emulator's
  debugger


# Compiling Faxanadu

The [source files](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/tree/main/src) can be
compiled using [asm6f](https://github.com/freem/asm6f), producing a
byte-for-byte copy of the Faxanadu code.

This has been tested on macOS and Linux.

Please note that this is purely for experimental and research purposes. Please
don't use this as a way of pirating the game. Surely this is an inconvenient
way to go about it.


# Using the Mesen Labels File

The Mesen Labels File will make any symbols/labels from my diassembly work
available in the Mesen debugger.

To use it:

1. Download [mesen/faxanadu.mlb](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanadu/blob/main/mesen/faxanadu.mlb).

2. In Mesen, open your completely legally-obtained Faxanadu ROM.

3. Open **Debug -> Debugger**, and then **File -> Workspace -> Import Labels**.

4. Select the `faxanadu.mlb` file.


# Other resources

* [Faxanatools](https://github.com/chipx86/faxanatools), a set of Python tools
  I'm building to help inspect and mod Faxanadu.

* [Faxanadu Randomizer](https://www.romhacking.net/utilities/1470/), a different
  Faxanadu adventure every time you play.


# Special thanks

* Hungry Goriya ([YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/hungrygoriya),
  [Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/hungrygoriya)),
  a fantastic retro streamer and Faxanadu fan with an amazing community.

* Refraction ([BlueSky](https://bsky.app/profile/refractionpcsx2.bsky.social)),
  a fellow dev who's 🤔'd and 🧐'd with me on stream while I've debugged
  some of this.

* Songbirder ([BlueSky](https://bsky.app/profile/songbirder.social),
  [Twitch](https://www.twitch.tv/songbirder)) from the Faxanadu Randomizer
  project, who's been very kind and encouraging with this work.


# What else do I do?

I'm the founder and CEO of [Beanbag](https://beanbaginc.com), creators of
[Review Board](https://www.reviewboard.org/), one of the first code review
products on the market (before GitHub even existed!).

Previously, I worked at VMware on the Workstation, Player, Server, WSX, and
View products. I worked in the Linux desktop on parts of GNOME and GTK+, and
was a core developer of the Gaim/Pidgin IM client.

You can find me elsewhere on the Internet at:

* [Website](https://chipx86.com)
* [Blog](https://chipx86.blog)
* [Bluesky](https://bsky.app/profile/chipx86.com)
* [Twitter/X](https://x.com/chipx86)
* [Mastodon](https://mastodon.online/@chipx86)
* [LinkedIn](https://www.linkedin.com/in/chipx86/)
* [GitHub](https://github.com/chipx86/)
* [Buy Me A Coffee](https://buymeacoffee.com/chipx86)
